---
date: 2023-09-15T14:23:00-04:00
title: "Mencoba LLM Huggingface: Text Summarization"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Machine Learning
  - Artificial Intelligence
  - Huggingface
  - Summarization
  - Text Analysis
  - R Studio
  - Python
  - Deep Learning
---


Beberapa hari ini, saya masih penasaran mengoprek beberapa model `LLM`
yang tersedia di situs **Huggingface**. Salah satu topik `LLM` yang
menarik menurut saya adalah *text summarization*.

Tiga tahun lalu, saya sempat membuat sendiri algoritma *text
summarization* dengan menggunakan prinsip *importance score per word*
yang saya kawinkan dengan *network analysis*. Hasilnya sendiri memuaskan
bagi saya. Silakan rekan-rekan semua cek kembali tulisannya di
[sini](https://ikanx101.com/blog/ext-based-sum/).

Kali ini, saya akan mencoba menggunakan salah satu model `LLM`
*summarization* yang ada di situs **Huggingface**. Saya mencoba model
`BART` [buatan tim
*Facebook*](https://huggingface.co/facebook/bart-large-cnn).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencoba dengan Artikel Wumard

Agar bisa *head to head* dengan algoritma buatan saya, saya akan gunakan
artikel yang sama dengan [tulisan saya
sebelumnya](https://ikanx101.com/blog/ext-based-sum/), yakni artikel
tulisan Pak Wumard di *blog* pribadinya.

Setelah saya coba, ternyata hasilnya mengecewakan! Model ini tidak bisa
melakukan tugasnya dengan baik dan benar.

> Jangan-jangan karena model ini dibangun bukan berasal dari Bahasa
> Indonesia?

Begitu pikir saya. Akibatnya, saya coba ganti modelnya dengan
`bert2bert` yang dibangun dari [bahasa
Indonesia](https://huggingface.co/cahya/bert2bert-indonesian-summarization).
Hasilnya bagaimana? Tetap ***kureng*** menurut saya. Rekan-rekan bisa
mencobanya sendiri ya menggunakan layanan di situs **Huggingface**.

Oleh karena itu, saya akan coba gunakan data teks Bahasa Inggris untuk
di-*summarize*-kan. Saya akan coba bandingkan hasil model Facebook
dengan model saya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Data Teks Asli

Berikut adalah data teks asli yang akan saya *summarization*:

> *After helping Bruce Wayne / Batman and Diana Prince / Wonder Woman
> stop a robbery in Gotham City, Barry Allen revisits his childhood
> home, where he lived with his parents Nora and Henry, before Henry’s
> wrongful imprisonment for Nora’s murder. On the day of her death, Nora
> sent Henry to the grocery store for a can of tomatoes that she forgot
> to buy, leaving her alone in the kitchen, resulting in her being
> killed by an unidentified assailant. Overcome by emotions, Barry
> accidentally uses the Speed Force to form a Chronobowl and travel back
> in time earlier in the day. Despite Bruce’s warnings of time travel’s
> unintended consequences, Barry time travels and places the can of
> tomatoes in Nora’s cart at the store, so that his father will not have
> to leave the house. As he returns to the present, Barry is knocked out
> of the Chronobowl by an unknown speedster and ends up in a 2013 where
> Nora is alive. He encounters his parents, his past self, and realizes
> this is the day he originally obtained his powers.*

> *In order to make sure his past self gains superpowers, the two Barrys
> go to the Central City Police Department, where Barry re-enacts the
> event for 2013-Barry to be struck by lightning. Both end up getting
> struck by the lightning, giving 2013-Barry powers, but causing Barry
> to lose his own. As Barry struggles to train 2013-Barry on properly
> using his powers, they learn that General Zod is preparing to invade
> Earth.\[c\] In an effort to fight Zod, the Barrys attempt to assemble
> the Justice League but are unsuccessful; in their timeline, they
> cannot locate Diana, Victor Stone has not gained his abilities yet,
> and Arthur Curry was never born. They travel to Wayne Manor, hoping to
> find Bruce, but instead find an alternate variant who has long
> retired. Bruce theorizes that using time travel to alter history
> affects events both prior to and after the alteration. They convince
> Bruce to return as Batman and help them find Kal-El / Superman.*

> *The Barrys and Batman locate a Kryptonian pod discovered in Siberia.
> Upon arrival, they instead find Kal-El’s cousin, Kara Zor-El,
> imprisoned in the facility. They rescue Kara and return to Wayne
> mansion. Barry enlists Bruce’s help to regain his power once more. The
> first two attempts fail, prompting Kara to fly Barry into a storm,
> where he regains his powers. Kara and Batman join the Barrys to fight
> Zod and his forces. During the battle, Kara learns that Zod had
> intercepted Kal-El’s escape pod and killed him in the process of
> extracting the Codex needed to repopulate the Kryptonian species. The
> Codex is actually within Kara. Zod subdues and kills her, then
> extracts the Codex from her blood; meanwhile, Batman sacrifices
> himself in an unsuccessful attempt to destroy Zod’s ship.*

> *The Barrys repeatedly time travel to save Batman and Kara but keep
> failing. Barry realizes that this sequence of events cannot be
> changed, but 2013-Barry keeps trying. As 2013-Barry travels, the
> multiverse starts to implode. The unknown speedster who initially
> knocked Barry out of the Speed Force returns and is revealed to be an
> older, future version of 2013-Barry who still believes he can defeat
> Zod and save his Earth. He becomes angry when Barry reveals his
> intention to reverse the changes he made to the timeline by letting
> Nora die. The elder 2013-Barry attempts to kill Barry, but instead
> impales young 2013-Barry, who sacrifices himself to save Barry and
> wipe his future self from the timeline.*

> *Barry reverts the timeline and comes to terms with his mother’s
> death; however, he subtly alters the past by moving the tomato cans to
> a higher shelf. Returning to the present day, Barry attends Henry’s
> court hearing, where the security footage now reveals Henry looking up
> to grab the tomato can, allowing for his exoneration. After returning
> to the present, Barry is contacted by Bruce, whose appearance has
> changed once again as a result of the timeline alteration.*

Iya, betul saya menggunakan alur cerita dari film The Flash. Kita akan
cek, *summary* mana yang lebih masuk akal.

### Hasil Algoritma Sendiri

Berikut adalah hasil *summarization* menggunakan model yang pernah saya
buat:

> *in order to make sure his past self gains superpowers, the two barrys
> go to the central city police department, where barry re-enacts the
> event for 2013-barry to be struck by lightning. both end up getting
> struck by the lightning, giving 2013-barry powers, but causing barry
> to lose his own. barry enlists bruce’s help to regain his power once
> more. the unknown speedster who initially knocked barry out of the
> speed force returns and is revealed to be an older, future version of
> 2013-barry who still believes he can defeat zod and save his earth. he
> becomes angry when barry reveals his intention to reverse the changes
> he made to the timeline by letting nora die. after returning to the
> present, barry is contacted by bruce, whose appearance has changed
> once again as a result of the timeline alteration.*

### Hasil `LLM` *BART* dari *Facebook*

Berikut adalah hasil *summarization* menggunakan LLM milik Facebook:

> *After helping Bruce Wayne / Batman and Diana Prince / Wonder Woman
> stop a robbery in Gotham City, Barry Allen revisits his childhood
> home, where he lived with his parents Nora and Henry. On the day of
> her death, Nora sent Henry to the grocery store for a can of tomatoes
> that she forgot to buy, leaving her alone in the kitchen, resulting in
> her being killed by an unidentified assailant. Overcome by emotions,
> Barry accidentally uses the Speed Force to form a Chronobowl and
> travel back in time earlier in the day. He encounters his parents, his
> past self, and realizes this is the day he originally obtained his
> powers. As Barry struggles to train 2013-Barry on properly using his
> powers, they learn that General Zod is preparing to invade Earth.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Kesimpulan

Hasilnya menarik *yah*…

Model milik *Facebook* berhasil membuat sinopsis cerita di separuh awal
film. Sedangkan model yang saya buat berhasil menuliskan jalan cerita
paruh kedua hingga *ending* film.

> Bagaimana menurut kalian?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

`if you find this article helpful, support this blog by clicking the ads.`
